Search has finally evolved and now everyone wants
to rank in AI search. But how? Our brilliant team
at HRF studied 75,000 brands and 25 million AI
overviews and found five key factors that give
you the best chance of ranking in AI search with
GEO. And it all starts with branded mentions.
Large language models like chatbt and Google learn
by reading the web. And every time your brand name
appears on a credible site, that becomes another
training example. And the more often an LLM sees
your brand connected to a specific topic, the
more confidently it associates your name with
that subject when generating answers. It's like
when you hear Red Bull, you think extreme sports.
Or when you hear Tesla, you think electric cars.
Or when you think of Ahrefs, you think of Sam O,
the charismatic SEO beast. Branded mentions are so
important that they have the strongest correlation
with visibility in Google's AI overviews. higher
than back links, referring domains, and domain
rating. But how do we know which pages or sites
to get mentioned on? According to our research,
get mentioned on highly linked to pages if you
want to rank in Google AI overviews and high
traffic pages if you want more visibility in chat
GPT and perplexity. To find pages and websites
worth getting mentioned on, go to HF's brand
radar and enter your brand, competitors, brands,
niche, and run the search. Then hit the cited
domains report where you'll see the top websites,
the number of AI responses, and the exact number
of times each brand is getting mentioned and how
they're being mentioned. From here, you can join
the Reddit threads AI is pulling from. Reach
out to YouTubers for future reviews or contact
publishers for potential PR campaigns. Basically,
you want your brand to appear literally everywhere
online, ideally in a positive and topically
relevant way. And that's because of the second key
factor for ranking an AI search. Longtail queries.
In traditional SEO, targeting longtail keywords
was mostly about coverage. The more queries you
rank for, the more ways there are for searchers
to find you. But in AI search, longtail queries
play a different role. AI assistants like Chat GPT
may actually use them to decide who to recommend.
And it's because of how AI assistants
work. When someone enters a prompt like,
"Plan me a 5-day trip to Japan in November," the
AI assistant fans it out into dozens of smaller
longtail subqueries. They then pull information
from multiple sources across the web and combine
it into one complete answer. So, if your content
ranks for those niche specific queries, your brand
has a much better chance of being included in the
AI's final response. And our data backs that up,
showing that Google's AI overviews are way more
likely to appear on longer niche queries. So from
a practical standpoint, you should a create
content that answers more complex specific
questions and b content clusters that deeply cover
the full depth of a topic. But here's the twist.
Even if you've nailed all of this, it might not
matter. Because if your content isn't structured
the way AI assistants process information, you may
not get as many AI search mentions as you should
be getting. One way Google AI reads content
is by using a tree walking algorithm, meaning
it follows the exact semantic HTML structure of a
web page from top to bottom. And this makes well-
formatted and structured content easier for it
to process. But it's not just about using heading
tags and bulleted lists. It's about how your
information flows. Your content should be clear,
organized, and easy to follow. And this matters
because when Google or Chat GPT read your page,
they don't process it all at once. They chunk
your content into smaller pieces, almost like
reading it paragraph by paragraph, and then they
decide which parts are most useful to keep. So,
if your juiciest points are buried deep
down or mixed into long, messy sections,
it makes it less efficient for AI to process your
content, which may have a role in rankings. Now,
that doesn't mean you should start writing
in short, choppy blurbs like an FAQ or make
every paragraph its own idea. Instead, focus on
grouping related thoughts together and keeping
each section focused on a single takeaway.
Think of it like giving AI a clear outline
where each part should make sense on its own
but still naturally connect to the next. Now,
even if your content is perfectly written and
structured, there's another key factor that
can put you in or completely knock you out of AI
results. And our data shows that this key factor
is all about freshness. Our study of 17 million
citations across seven AI search platforms found
that AI assistants strongly prefer newer
information. In fact, content cited by AI
is 25.7% fresher than the content that shows
up in regular Google results. And Chat GPT and
Perplexity go even further. They tend to list
citations from newest to oldest. That happens
because most assistants use something called rag.
RAG stands for retrieval, augment, and generation,
which is the part of an AI system that goes out
and looks things up. If a model already knows the
answer from its training data, it doesn't need
to search again. Just like you and I don't need
to search for directions to places we visit all
the time. But if the topic is new or evolving,
Rag steps in and fetches the latest information
from the web to fill in the gaps. That's why
freshness isn't just a ranking signal anymore.
It's a retrieval signal in this AI era. And here's
proof that freshness can boost your AI rankings.
In April this year, HubSpot updated their small
business ideas article and soon saw a massive
spike to their organic traffic. No surprises
there, but their AI mentions to that page also
spiked at the exact same time, generating over,00
new mentions according to HR brand radar. So
something you can do is to take note of pages
that could benefit from regular updates and add
them to your regular refresh cycle. Update facts,
new quotes or stats, remove things that have
become irrelevant, and redate the post when
it's meaningful. And that one small update could
be the difference in getting mentioned across
AI platforms. By the way, I probably should
have mentioned this earlier, but before you
do anything, make sure your site can actually be
crawled by AI bots. Kind of sounds silly, but in
our study of 140 million websites, about 5.9%
were blocking OpenAI's GPT bot alone. So, take
two seconds to go to yourdommain.com/roots.txt
and make sure you're not accidentally blocking
the very systems you're trying to rank in.
And that brings us to our final, easiest,
and perhaps most important key factor, and it's
all about diversifying your strategies. Normally,
when I talk about diversifying your traffic or
marketing strategy, it's because over reliance
on a single channel can wipe a business out
overnight, which we've seen happen time and
time again. But that's not the reason you should
diversify in the context of AI. In our data set,
we compared the top 50 most mentioned domains in
Google AI overviews, chat GBT, and Perplexity. And
get this, only seven of those domains appeared
on all three lists. That means that 86% of
sources are unique to each assistant. Google
AI overviews leans heavily on YouTube, Reddit,
and Quora. Chat GPT prefers publishers and news
outlets like Reuters and the Associated Press. And
Perplexity tends to site niche or regional sites
like health, finance, and localized blogs. So,
even if you dominate one of these ecosystems, that
doesn't mean that you're guaranteed to appear in
the others. Hence, diversification is a must. To
find the pages you need to optimize for each AI
platform, go to HF's brand radar and add your
brand, a few of your competitors, a niche, and
run the search. Hover over your brand under the AI
platform you want to investigate, and hit others
only. Finally, go to the cited pages report to see
all of the web pages that are being recommended in
your AI platform of choice where your competitors
are mentioned, but you're not. Then, go and reach
out to these websites to try and get your brand
mentioned alongside your competitors. And when
you're done with that AI platform, hit the drop
down, choose the next AI platform you want to be
mentioned on, and rinse and repeat. Now, a lot of
this advice might sound familiar because doing GEO
or AEO or LMO is still just SEO. The difference
is that you got to think broader. It's not just
about content and links anymore. It's about
building a brand and showing up everywhere
your audience already is. But here's the truth.
No one's really saying out loud. No one actually
knows how to definitively optimize for AI search
yet. It's still too early. For now, all we have
is the data we've analyzed. And now we need more
practitioners to go out there, test, and share the
results. And one of those practitioners is already
testing so we can build that step-by-step playbook
for you to follow. So, make sure to subscribe
for updates, and I'll see you in the next video.